# Introduction

The invention and popularization of computers has caused many people to attempt to use computers to aid in manual processes. One such category of processes it art: Using computers to assist in the creation of artwork. In fact, one of the first applications for which a computer mouse was used was a computer graphics program. In 1968, Douglas Engelbart demonstrated a computer mouse being used to control a computer graphics program[1]. Since then, computer artwork tools have steadily evolved over the years. For example, in 1985 the first version of Microsoft Paint was released. This program offered a small set of rudimentary tools for the creation of digital artwork: A paintbrush tool to paint by click-and-drag; a pencil tool as a finer variant of the paintbrush; a paint bucket tool to click-to-fill areas with color; an eraser; and selection tools to allow copying and pasting of sections of an image. All of these tools were predecessors of those available in more modern software. At the time however, the available tools were few and relatively crude, but in time photorealistic image manipulation became possible. More advanced graphics programs, including Adobe Photoshop, contain many refined tools and filters which can be used to create very convincing effects of all kinds. However, with the advancement of computer learning techniques in fields such as convolutional neural networks, attempts have been recently made to accomplish some of these art-related tasks via computer learning.

This blog will cover a variety of neural network-based art techniques and implementations. In particular, the automated coloring of black-and-white images will be mainly focused on, with descriptions of various alternative implementations and comparisons between them. The colorization implementations included have been selected which a focus on the colorization of sketches or drawings, partly for the sake of clarity. However, many of these implementations can also be used to colorize many other kinds of images. Also, additional artwork-related tasks which can be improved via machine learning techniques will also be explored. The next section of this paper includes an overview of non-machine-learning-based computer artwork techniques, and it is followed by a section describing the architectures and implementations of various neural network-based drawing colorization techniques. Afterward, a section which compares and analyzes these implementations is included, followed by a section on various other non-colorization artwork techniques which use neural networks.

## References

 1. "Doug's Great Demo: 1968." *Doug Engelbart Institute.* Doug Engelbart Institute, 2018, [www.dougengelbart.org/firsts/dougs-1968-demo.html](http://www.dougengelbart.org/firsts/dougs-1968-demo.html). Accessed 8 Mar. 2018.
