# Simple Image Colorization Techniques

Traditionally speaking, the coloring of a drawing has (until relatively recently) been a manual process. An artist performs all of the tasks and makes all of the decisions required to turn a linework into a colored artwork. The selections of coloring medium (e.g. pencils, paints, etc.), styles, and techniques are all undertaken by the coloring artist. Then of course, with the advent of the computer came various attempts at allowing the creation of artwork via computer.

Early programs like Microsoft Paint, created in 1985, provided some basic recreations of several artistic processes: drawing was accomplished with a hard-edged click-and-drag “pencil” tool or with various line-or-shape-making tools; “painting” was accomplished with a click-and-drag “paintbrush” tool or with a click-to-fill “paint bucket” tool; and various ways of “selecting” portions of an artwork to erase, move or copy-and-paste were often provided. But the creation of art via these methods was often hampered by the degree of primitivity of the tools provided, as well as by other factors (including color palette limitations in much early software. For example, MS Paint was notorious for its lack of any blending effects: All of its tools create hard-edged effects (for instance, a drawing tool operates by either entirely changing, or entirely ignoring, the color values of its target pixels, without applying any smoothing effect around the edges of the affected area). As such, all lines drawn in MS Paint have obvious hard edges. Although such tools can and have been used to create art, working with tools with such flaws is inherently difficult.

Eventually art programs evolved into a somewhat more sophisticated form, often called “photo editing software”. Capable of importing and editing high-quality digital photographs, these photo editors came with more refined and expanded tools as compared to their predecessors, including new classes of tools known as filters. These began as digital analogues of the traditional film photography tools also known as filters: devices or obstructions put in the path of the light during exposure of the film or print which serve to alter the final photograph. Simple filters include blurs, burn and dodge, and colorization; however, many photo editors also include more eclectic filters such as wave or ripple effects or lens flares. The quintessential example of a photo editor is Adobe Photoshop. First released in 1990, Photoshop contained a wide set of tools of high quality that were well-suited for creating artwork: Tools supported configurable options including brush size and shape, edge hardness, and more; high-resolution editing was possible, and importing/exporting from/to a wide range of image formats or camera devices was supported. With such a wide range of options available, an artist could configure their tools to produce effects that looked however they wanted them to, and this enabled the creation of an extremely large variety of artwork from scratch using Photoshop.
